---
title: 'The Climate Equity Reference Calculator core database'
author:
  - Ceecee Holz
  - Tom Athanasiou
  - Sivan Kartha
date: 10 October 2024, v7.4
geometry: a4paper, margin=1in
linestretch: 1.1
bibliography: Database_Documentation_v7.4.bib
csl: ieee-with-url-or-doi.csl
---
The database for the _Climate Equity Reference Calculator_[^cerc-note] includes 197 entities: 196 of the 197 state parties[^eu-party-note] to the UNFCCC, plus Taiwan. Data for China, Macao, and Hong Kong, which are typically reported separately in most income and emissions databases, are combined.[^chk-gini-note] Likewise, we combine, where applicable, data for overseas dependencies of countries (e.g. we add Greenland and Faroe Island figures to Denmark).
The _Climate Equity Reference Calculator_ database is updated regularly with newly published data. The current calculator and published documentation are based primarily on data published up to September 2024 (see details below). For archival purposes it is database version 7.4.^[Starting with version 7.0 from 2015, all main versions of the core database are available in the Harvard Dataverse [@coredb_dataverse].]

[^cerc-note]: The Climate Equity Reference calculator [@JOSS_CERC_Article] is available at <a href="https://calculator.climateequityreference.org">https://calculator.climateequityreference.org</a>. Its open source code can be inspected on Github at <a href="https://github.com/climateequityreferenceproject/cerc-web">https://github.com/climateequityreferenceproject/cerc-web</a>.
[^eu-party-note]: The UNFCCC has 198 parties. However, one of those is the European Union, which in our database is represented by its member states and in the _Calculator_ can also be examined as a single entity. The only state party to the UNFCCC that is not included in our _Calculator_ is the Holy See, for which most of the indicators needed to construct the _Calculator_ database are not readily available.
[^chk-gini-note]: Our methodology for combining the Gini Coefficients for these entities as a weighted sum of lognormal distributions is described in more detail in [@Kemp-Benedict_Athanasiou_Baer_Holz_Kartha_2018]. As of database version 7.4, we are not applying this methodology anymore and are instead using the Gini Coefficients for China. For all other metrics (emissions, GDP, population etc.), the figures for China include those of Hong Kong and Macao.
[^no_forecase_countries_note]: For a small number of countries, the IMF WEO does not provide a complete set of historical and projected GDP growth, typically owing to highly uncertain political and/or economic situations. For these countries (currently: Syria from 2011, Eritrea from 2020, Lebanon from 2022, Afghanistan and Sri Lanka from 2023, Palestine from 2024 and Venezuela from 2026), we use an arbitrary annual contraction rate of -10% until future IMF WEO updates resume projections. Additionally, due to the central role of GDP projections in our GHG baseline projections, for these countries, we hold GHG emissions constant from these same years onwards. Owing to this, results for these countries should be interpreted with a high degree of caution.

## Income (GDP)

Recent historical income (GDP)[^GNI_vs_GDP_Note] data comes primarily from the World Bank’s _World Development Indicators Online_ [@Worldbank_2021], as the highest priority data source, which contains data for national income from 1960 to 2020 for almost all of the countries in the database. For most of the missing countries, data comes from the _CIA World Factbook_ [@CIA_2017], as a second-order priority source. For data prior to 1960 or other missing years, data comes from the Maddison data set [@Maddison_2009; @Maddison-Project_2013; @Bolt_van_Zanden_2014]. Where data are available for a country for any year from a higher priority source, we use the slopes (rather than absolute values) from lower priority sources to extend, or fill in, the time series.
Data are reported in 2010 US$, at market exchange rates (MER). For several of its calculations, the _Calculator_ uses income adjusted for purchasing power parity (PPP). Conversion to PPP (2005) is based on converting “Current US Dollars” for 2005 to PPP (Current International Dollars). The PPP conversion rate is held constant at this value.

Income (GDP) projections from 2024-2029 are from the IMF’s _World Economic Outlook_ (WEO), April 2024 [@WEO_Apr_2024].[^no_forecase_countries_note] Each country’s IMF-reported growth rate is applied to the most recent World Bank national GDP data (in most cases 2020); the IMF WEO growth rate for each country for 2029 is also applied to 2030. Beyond 2030, long term estimates are based on the median GDP growth rates across the models in the EMF27-Base-FullTech baseline scenario ensemble as reported in the IPCC AR5 scenario database that are available for the five IPCC world regions [@IPCC_2015].

The short term projections directly take the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic into account, both in terms of the economic shock in 2020/21 as well as typically lower growth rate projections through 2029. Long-term projections indirectly account for this impact by extending the same GDP projection time series beyond 2030.

[^GNI_vs_GDP_Note]: Conceptually, gross national income (GNI) would be the more appropriate principal measure to use in the _Calculator_'s effort sharing calculations as a measure of ability to pay, since GNI, unlike GDP, includes income earned by a country’s residents from sources outside the country while it does not include income earned in the country by non-residents. Instead, however, we are using GDP here as a proxy for GNI. The main reason is that publicly available datasets for GNI have major data gaps and are therefore not suited for a calculator that includes all countries. Importantly, GNI and GDP are extremely closely correlated, so that GDP is a suitable proxy for GNI, despite the former’s relative weakness as a measure of ability to pay.

## CO~2~ emissions (excluding LULUCF)

CO~2~ data come from the _PRIMAP-hist_ database [@PRIMAPhist_v2-5-1; @PRIMAPhist_MethArticle] for the period from 1850[^pre_1850_note] through to 2022. _PRIMAP-hist_ is a well-documented, well-constructed, and well-maintained composite dataset compiled at the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research (PIK). _PRIMAP-hist_, in turn, is based on various authoritative data sources including the UNFCCC, the _Carbon Dioxide Information and Analysis Center (CDIAC)_, the _EDGAR_ database and others. For Palestine, we use data from the _Global Carbon Budget_ dataset [@GCB_2023_article; @GCB_2023_data] directly, and subtract those figures from Israel’s value as _PRIMAP-hist_ reports those countries together.

Since one of the main purposes of the _Climate Equity Reference Calculator_ is the assessment of national climate action pledges (for example, as expressed in countries’ Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) under the Paris Agreement), we project national baseline emissions starting after 2015, the year the Paris Agreement was adopted. For CO~2~ emissions, exclusive of emissions from Land Use, Land Use Change, and Forestry (LULUCF), these projections after 2015 are based on the median carbon intensity changes modelled in the EMF27-Base-FullTech scenario from the IPCC AR5 scenario database for each of the five IPCC regions [@IPCC_2015], combined with national GDP projections as described above.[^no-projection-countries-ghg-note] The EMF27-Base-FullTech scenario ensemble has been chosen since it represents a very conventional baseline scenario that does not intentionally embed preferences for any particular technologies. Another reason for choosing this scenario ensemble over more recent baseline scenarios is that contemporary baseline scenarios are typically conceptualized as “current policy” or “current effort” scenarios, whereas, conceptually, the _Climate Equity Reference Calculator_ requires “no effort” baselines. Using “current policy” baselines in the _Calculator_ database would disadvantage countries that are already undertaking meaningful mitigation efforts by disregarding those efforts in the effort-sharing calculations.

[^pre_1850_note]: Emissions before 1850 are ignored because most of the other variables required for our calculations have no reliable, country-level data sources for prior to 1850, and since pre-1850 emissions only represent about 0.3% of global cumulative CO~2~ emissions from fossil fuels, flaring and cement over the 1750-2020 period [@GCB_2023_data].
[^no-projection-countries-ghg-note]: For the seven countries for which the IMF WEO does not offer GDP projections (see above), and for which, therefore, our standard projection approach is unsuitable, we simply keep baseline emissions constant at the level of the last year for which the IMF WEO has data (see footnote above).

## Non-CO~2~ Greenhouse Gases

Values for non-CO~2~ GHGs are also taken directly from the _PRIMAP-hist_ database [@PRIMAPhist_v2-5-1; @PRIMAPhist_MethArticle]. All non-CO~2~ greenhouse gases are converted into CO~2~ equivalents (CO~2~eq) using the 100-year Global Warming Potential (GWP-100) values from the IPCC’s Fourth Assessment Report (AR4).

Baseline projections for 2016 to 2035 for all countries are based on the median annual absolute rates of change reported in the IPCC AR5 scenario database for the models of the EMF27-Base-FullTech scenario ensemble by region [@IPCC_2015].

## CO~2~ from Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF)

This database update, like every version since 7.2, does not support _Climate Equity Reference Calculator_ calculations that include CO~2~ emissions from Land Use, Land Use Change, and Forestry (LULUCF). This decision has been taken for several reasons. First, LULUCF emissions data are subject to very large uncertainties and fluctuations, which in some cases are so large that for the same year and country one data source reports a land use sink while another reports a source. For example, for Annex I countries the UNFCCC data interface [@unfccc_data] reports removals three times as large in 2015 as the values of the _PRIMAP-hist_ database, which are in turn based on _FAOSTAT_ [@faostat].

Further, including LULUCF emissions in a single framework together with CO~2~ emissions from fossil fuel and industry and non-CO~2~ gases, presupposes the, in our view problematic, assumption that emissions from LULUCF and other sources are essentially fungible, and that emissions reductions in either space are perfectly equivalent. This has with profound implications, for example, with regard to the speed of the decarbonization of the energy system and the treatment of nature primarily as a carbon sink.

We are exploring the possibility of including LULUCF emissions again in future releases, albeit only in the context of the calculation of historical responsibility. However, users with specific projects where inclusion of LULUCF emissions is vital, should contact the authors to explore how this might best be facilitated.[^BRA_NDC_Note] Furthermore, even though the _Climate Equity Reference Calculator_ does not support LULUCF anymore, the calculator database still contains up-to-date values for LULUCF emissions (for most countries, using the _BLUE_ time series [@BLUE] as reported by the _Global Carbon Project_ [@GCB_2023_article; @GCB_2023_data], for Brazil using [@SEEG_2024]). As a result, the LULUCF emissions time series will still be included in the files generated by the calculator’s “download complete Excel table” functionality, but these data should be used with appropriate caution.

[^BRA_NDC_Note]: For example, we contributed to Observatorio do Clima’s proposal for Brazil's Second Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) under the Paris Agreement (2030-2035) [@BRA_NDC], which included LULUCF emissions in the mitigation fair shares calculations.

## Gini Coefficients

This version 7.4 includes a major update to the sourcing of Gini Coefficients for the _Climate Equity Reference Calculator_ database.[^prior_version_gini_source_note] Recently, the _World Inequality Database_ (_WID.world_) has established itself as a high-quality data source for inequality data with excellent temporal and spatial coverage [@WID_2024; @WIR_2022; @WID_DINA_Meth_Doc_2024]. _WID.world_ now covers 173 of the 197 countries in our database for the period from 1980-2022 and provides Gini Coefficients for a number of different wealth and income inequality concepts. From among those, for the _Climate Equity Reference Calculator_ database, we consider the inequality in post-tax incomes the most suitable metric, as it measures the distribution of income after redistribution, that is, it reflects the distributional effects of each country's tax and social welfare systems (including in-kind welfare provision, such as government-provided health care).[@WID_Codebook]

For the missing 24 countries,[^WID_missing_countries_note] we turn to the _World Income Inequality Database_ (_WIID_) [@WIID_2023] as a second-tier data source.[^WIID_missing_note] The _WIID_ utilizes different approaches, concepts, and underlying data sources for measuring income inequality than _WID.world_, and Gini coefficients from _WIID_ are thus generally lower than those from _WID.world_. To compensate for this structural difference, we adjust the _WIID_-sourced values by multiplying with a constant (for each year) that is obtained by dividing the simple average across all Gini Coefficients in _WID.world_ for that year by the average of the Gini Coefficients in _WIID_ for the same countries for the same year.

It is important to note that this change of Gini Coefficients, relative to prior versions of the _Calculator_ database, has substantial impact on the results of the effort sharing calculations for individual countries. For most countries, _WID.world_ reports higher Gini Coefficients than the data source for Gini Coefficients that had been used in _Calculator_ databases prior to the present version 7.4 (namely version 2 of the _WIID_ dataset [@WIID_v2]). Specifically, out of the 173 countries in the _WID.world_ database, the _WID.world_ Gini Coefficients are lower than those in our previous database versions for 27 countries (with an average decrease in Gini Coefficients in 2020 across these countries of 9.8%), whereas the remaining 147 countries have a higher Gini Coefficient (with an average increase of 34%). Perhaps the most notable examples of the 27 countries with decreased Gini Coefficients are the United States, China, and the United Kingdom.[^Gini_decreased_countries_note]

This means inequality within countries is higher for most countries with the current _Calculator_ database than with previous database versions, which in turn means higher Capacity even without any changes to GDP, because an increase in the Gini Coefficient (signifying higher inequality) shifts income upward in the income distribution, and hence a larger fraction of a country’s income could be shifted above the development threshold and/or upper threshold, depending on where these thresholds are set.[^Gini_Capacity_Note] However, since it is a country’s share of global Capacity that determines its fair share, it is the _relative_ shift of countries’ Capacity that matters (relative to the shift of all other countries). In other words, an increase (or decrease) in Gini Coefficient does not automatically result in an increase (or decrease) in fair share. For the definitions of Capacity that were adopted by a number of studies that used the _Climate Equity Reference Calculator_ (e.g. [@CSER_2015; @CSER_2023; @RacF_2022; @Oxfam_G20_2023; @CANRac_2024]), developing countries as a group (and most of them individually – though note the exceptions listed in the footnote) are assigned larger fair shares with the Gini Coefficients from the _WID.world_ database than they would have with previous database versions, while the reverse is generally true for developed countries. However, for definitions of Capacity that were significantly more progressive (i.e., a higher development threshold and/or uppper threshold), this may not be the case.


[^prior_version_gini_source_note]: Prior versions of the database have been using gini coefficients for income inequality from the _World Income Inequality Database_, maintained at the United Nations University’s World Institute for Development Economics Research (UNU-WIDER) [@WIID_v2].
[^WID_missing_countries_note]: The missing countries are small island states and four European microstates.
[^WIID_missing_note]: Only the Cook Islands and Niue are missing from both the WIID and WID.world datasets. For these two countries, we simply use the average across all Pacific Small Island Developing States for each year.
[^Gini_decreased_countries_note]: For transparency, the other countries where this is the case are Azerbaijan, Belgium, Denmark, France, Gabon, Iceland, Ireland, Kenya, Lebanon, Lesotho, Luxembourg, Moldova, Namibia, Norway, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Ukraine, and Zimbabwe.
[^Gini_Capacity_Note]: For a more thorough discussion of the link between Gini Coefficients and Capacity, see Supplementary Text 3 in the supplementary materials to [@Saelen2019].

## Population

Current, historical and projected population for most countries are taken from the 2022 edition of the _United Nations Population Division_’s _World Population Prospects_ (medium variant) [@UN_Pop_2022].

## Calculating the RCI from the Equity Calculator dataset

The _Climate Equity Reference Calculator_ sets a country’s fair share of the global climate effort in proportion to its Responsibility and Capacity Index, or _RCI_, which in turn is calculated from a country’s capacity and responsibility. Capacity for a given year is defined as the sum of the income of all individuals in the country, excluding the total income of everyone under a user-specified income level referred to as the development threshold. Central to the calculation is the commonly-used assumption that national income distributions can be modeled as lognormal distributions.^[Wikipedia [@Wikipedia_2017] offers a good technical description of the lognormal distribution] The lognormal distribution has been shown to provide a reasonable approximation of measured income distributions [@Lopez_Serven_2006]. With this assumption, any national income distribution can be estimated with just a Gini Coefficient and the per-capita income.

The _Calculator_’s initial setting for the development threshold is $7,500 per capita, in PPP-adjusted 2005 USD; so we will use that number in the following example. For people receiving more than $7,500 annually, only their income above that threshold counts towards the national measure of capacity (as a result, two countries with the same population and with the same per capita GDP will not have equal capacity if they have different Gini Coefficients. Rather, the country with the higher Gini Coefficient, i.e. the country with the less equal income distribution, will have more income above the development threshold, and thus will have greater capacity[^RCI_gini_capacity_note]).

Responsibility is calculated in a similar manner. Emissions are calculated from income based on a user-specified elasticity, which is initially set to one (i.e., all individuals in a country have emissions proportional to income); thus, all emissions are excluded for those whose incomes are under the development threshold, and emissions equivalent to $7,500 of consumption at the national average carbon intensity of income are excluded for those with income over the threshold. Unlike the calculation of capacity, however, responsibility is calculated on a cumulative basis, starting at a user-specified initial year, so that responsibility in (say) 2035 is the sum of responsibility calculated in this way for each year from the specified start year to 2035.

Capacity and responsibility are then expressed as a percentage of the global total, and combined into a single “Responsibility and Capacity Index,” or _RCI_, by taking a weighted average. In other words, a country’s _RCI_ measures the country’s share of the combined global Capacity and Responsibility. In the _Calculator_, the Responsibility and Capacity weightings are initially set to be equal, but the calculator allows this to be user-specified, all the way from 100% Responsibility to 100% Capacity, to allow users to reflect their views that determining equitable shares of the global effort based on one of these factors alone is the appropriate ethical position to take.

A more detailed technical description of the algorithms and equations involved in these calculations is available elsewhere [@Kemp-Benedict_Athanasiou_Baer_Holz_Kartha_2018].

[^RCI_gini_capacity_note]: Again, a more thorough discussion of the effects of income inequality on the RCI, see Supplementary Text 3 in the supplementary materials to [@Saelen2019].

## References
